---
layout: post
title: "A Counter"
date: 2018-03-21 20:40:00 -0700
categories: blog
tags: scheme
---
{% highlight scheme %}
(define counter
  (lambda ()
    (let ((x 0))
      (lambda ()
	(set! x (+ x 1))))))
{% endhighlight %}

The function, `counter`, takes no arguments and returns a new function that also takes no arguments. When this new function is called, it will increment a number, initially 0, and return the previous value. This is an example of a **closure**, in which the variable `x` persists inside the new function, even though it was local to `counter`! Further calls to this new function will keep on incrementing the number, just as how a counter may be expected to behave.

Here's an example to demonstrate:

{% highlight scheme %}
(define a (counter))
(a) ; => 0
(a) ; => 1
(define b (counter))
(b) ; => 0
(a) ; => 2
{% endhighlight %}

Note how the counters each have their own copy of `x`: calling `b` returns 0 and the next call to `a` returns 2. If the counters had shared their values, then `(b)` would have returned 2 and the last `(a)` would have returned 3.

The main inspiration for this snippet was from reading Chapter 5 of [Teach Yourself Scheme in Fixnum Days](http://ds26gte.github.io/tyscheme/), which describes lexical scoping in Scheme. Here the author also uses a counter to explain but with a global variable. I was curious as to how a non-global implementation would look and set off to work. Thankfully this was simple in Scheme, so I did not work long.

In any case, Scheme is turning out to be an interesting programming language to learn. I'd recommend reading that chapter just to see how else a global variable can be manipulated. In particular, I haven't seen a language support a feature like `fluid-let` before.
